cases: Model Registries (#3333)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/use-cases/model-registry.md

# Machine Learning Model Registries

A **model registry** is a central catalog for data artifacts produced in
multiple data science projects. Models can be discovered, audited, shared,
tested, and deployed from here. DVC enables these features on the Git ecosystem,
reducing friction between development and operations. Other tools from
[Iterative](https://iterative.ai/) provide more advanced features and better

> usability.

Author: > tools from Iterative

💡  It would be nice to have a landing page for the list of Iterative.ai products. Right now it's a menu you have to click on in the home page:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1477535/162360673-1af8b29b-9f06-4e68-9994-813fb2a8c409.png)

Author: Idea moved to https://github.com/iterative/iterative.ai/issues/431

![](/img/ml_model_registry_placement.jpg) _A common placement for model
registries is between development and applications. See also [Data Registries]._

[data registries]: /doc/use-cases/data-registries

DVC model registries give your team key collaborative capabilities:

- Store, organize, and track the [versions] of different models effectively.
- Full data provenance and lineage trails guarantee that your modeling is
  reproducible.

> - Share and control access to early-stage [experiments] and production-ready

Reviewer: this is not clear to be honest

Author: Updated to:

> - Share and control access to any data artifact, whether these are early-stage [experiments] or production-ready models.

I think that's clearer. I'm just not sure it's necessary to mention that range of possibilities anymore... but it's nice to link to experiments from somewhere here. WDYT?

Reviewer: okay, got it, that's fine!

  models alike.
- Save performance [metrics and plots] to quickly evaluate and compare models.
- A platform to export, integrate, deploy, or roll-back published models

[experiments]: /doc/user-guide/experiment-management
[metrics and plots]: /doc/start/metrics-parameters-plots

Many of these benefits are built into DVC: Your [modeling process] and
performance metadata become **codified** in Git-based <abbr>DVC projects</abbr>.
This makes it possible to manage them with standard GitOps workflows. Large
files can be pushed to [remote storage], an efficient and scalable access point
for your models.

> To achieve the remaining goals, the final outputs of these model development

Reviewer: At this moment we think that Studio should be solving this - combining models from multiple repos.

Saving performance metrics, evaluate and compare - this can be done in a single repo with DVC or in Studio

`A platform to export, integrate, deploy, or roll-back published models` - this is done by `gto` (which is published already), by `mlem` (deploy, and it's coming), `roll-back` (also by GTO). Btw this item is a bit too complicated. In our case this system provide interface to access a model of a specific version (on CI, or from a service). ... other tools do more things

Author: > we think that Studio should be solving this - combining models from multiple repos

Yep but that release is still a bit away I think?

We could focus on a hypothetical manual registry done purely with DVC for now. We'll definitely want to revisit this use case soon anyway (it's in the Q2 plan already).

---

Working on the GTO mentions... ⌛

Author: > this item is a bit too complicated. In our case this system provide interface to access a model of a specific version (on CI, or from a service)

Simplified for now.

projects can be **packaged** and published in a global DVC repository. Existing
model files stored remotely are reused without copying them, so building the
registry is fast. A connection to the original projects is preserved, so you can
always retrieve full lineage and provenance information.

> Distributed DVC repos and managed storage are already great for [sharing] data

Reviewer: `Distributed DVC repos and managed storage`  - `DVC managed repos` or maybe even "DVC repos" ? (to simplify this)

Author: Simplified.

and models. And getting your models from the registry to production is also

> properly tooled: deploy manually with the `dvc` [CLI], integrate with code using

Reviewer: `tooled`  - this sounds strange to me, not very common usage

Author: Yes I think I wanted to go for "tooling". Using this for now:

> Now you also have proper tools to get models from the registry to production: ...

WDYT?

- Organize and track model [versions] effectively; with full data provenance and
  lineage information based on [reproducible modeling].
- A single interface to access specific models, both for collaboration (from
  other teammate machines) and to productionize them (e.g. via CI/CD).
- Designate certain models for different environments stages (dev, shadow, prod,
  etc.) without having to touch the applications that use them.
- For security, control who can manage models, and audit their usage trails.

[experiments]: /doc/user-guide/experiment-management
[metrics, plots]: /doc/start/metrics-parameters-plots
[versions]: /doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files
[reproducible modeling]: /doc/start/data-pipelines

Many of these benefits are built into DVC: Your [modeling process] and
performance information become **codified** in Git-based <abbr>DVC
projects</abbr>. This makes it possible to manage them with standard Git
workflows along with code. Large model files are stored separately and
efficiently, and can be pushed to [remote storage] -- a scalable access point
for [sharing].

An additional route to build a Git-native registry is to **annotate** ML models

> in your repos using tags. [GTO] (Git Tag Ops) is a tool to do just that! The

Reviewer: `do just that` - can we make it sound a bit less like an ad :)

Author: Rephrased.

> An additional route to build a Git-native registry is to **annotate** ML models
> in your repos using tags. [GTO] (Git Tag Ops) is a tool to do just that! The
> annotations carry meaningful metadata, such as a model file path, deployment
> env, etc. and get codified in the repo. GTO also helps manage your models
> lifecycle: promoting versions, rolling back, and reviewing history.

Reviewer 2: In fact, with git tags we register semantic versions and promote them to production. We `annotate` by writing to `artifacts.yaml`. Also, I would bring forward the use cases instead of providing some details, e.g.

```suggestion
An additional route to build a Git-native registry is to use git tags to **register**
and **promote** [semantic versions](https://semver.org) of ML models. 
[GTO] (Git Tag Ops) helps you do that. Besides helping you manage models lifecycle, 
GTO helps you **annotate** your models to define the registry-level names for your DVC outputs.
```

By `registry-level names` I mean human-friendly names you would like to see in MR, instead of some path. I'm sure there should be a better wording to explain this)

Author: Thanks! The suggested text is too technical, but I rewrote the GTO paragraph to mention the use cases more accurately. PTAL @aguschin 🙏🏼

And to fully **package** models, you can introduce [MLEM] in any Python code

> that uses common ML libraries. It automagically codifies all the context needed

Reviewer: let's try to replace codifies pls - it too technical I think

Author: Changed to "captures".

> And to fully **package** models, you can introduce [MLEM] in any Python code
> that uses common ML libraries. It automagically codifies all the context needed
> to produce them, and is able to push them to any cloud storage (by itself or via
> DVC), list and transfer them among locations, or even serve them directly!

Reviewer 2: 1. I think the first sentence may be simpler
2. I would add more about MLEM as deploy - to let people know their MR can be used to simplify deployment
3. MLEM doesn't codify what's needed **to produce** models, but to serve them.
4. **automagically** is nice 😂 

An option
```suggestion
And to fully **package** models, you can save them with [MLEM]
in your Python training scripts. It automagically saves all the context needed 
to run the model, and is able to push them to any cloud storage (by itself or via
DVC), list and transfer them among locations, or even serve and deploy them 
to your favorite deployment platforms!
```

`favorite deployment platforms` is exagerration, we can remove that if you think it's better to be more humble until we have more supported providers

Author: Rephrased as well!

  other teammate machines) and to productionize them (e.g. via CI/CD).
- Designate certain models for different environments stages (dev, shadow, prod,
  etc.) without having to touch the applications that use them.
- For security, control who can manage models, and audit their usage trails.

[experiments]: /doc/user-guide/experiment-management
[metrics, plots]: /doc/start/metrics-parameters-plots
[versions]: /doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files
[reproducible modeling]: /doc/start/data-pipelines

Many of these benefits are built into DVC: Your [modeling process] and
performance information become **codified** in Git-based <abbr>DVC
projects</abbr>. This makes it possible to manage them with standard Git
workflows along with code. Large model files are stored separately and
efficiently, and can be pushed to [remote storage] -- a scalable access point
for [sharing].

To make a Git-native registry (on top of DVC or not), one option is to use [GTO]
(Git Tag Ops). It tags ML model releases and promotions, and links them to
artifacts in the repo using versioned **annotations**. This creates abstractions

> for your models, which lets you manage their lifecycle freely and directly from

Reviewer 2: I would make "lifecycle" bold instead of annotations. Annotations are great, but main point for GTO to exist is to manage the model lifecycle in Git. The annotations are important to connect GTO to actual files (models) in the repo, but that doesn't bring value by itself.

Reviewer 2: Everything else looks good! Thanks for the huge work @jorgeorpinel !

Author: Done.

Git.

And to **package** the models, you can save them with [MLEM] in your Python
training code. It automagically captures all the context needed to deploy them,
and saves it to the repo. It can save your model files in cloud storage (by

> itself or with DVC), list and transfer them among locations, or even serve them

Reviewer 2: I still miss more clear indication that MLEM helps you use your model downstream. Pack it, deploy it. But since this is the page about MR, maybe that's ok.

Author: Yeah this paragraph improves with my understanding of MLEM. Reviewing mlem.ai/doc contents has helped 😋 . I rephrased it again, PTAL @aguschin

# Machine Learning Model Registry

> A **model registry** is a repository to catalog ML models and their versions.

Reviewer: `is a repository` - we start with being DVC-specific?

repository -> tool, service, place ...

Author: "repository" has a general meaning too 🙂 which is what we were going for here.

<img width="752" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1477535/165796063-b7ed5077-6cb2-4e8a-94b9-b45097da7806.png">

Reviewer: in this case it's clearly overloaded

Author: > repository -> tool, service, place

OK I did change this to "construct" after all since "repo"'s definition (computing context) may imply "central" per ☝🏼 (and we want to avoid emphasizing that aspect per https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/3333#discussion_r861087231).

> Artifacts from your data science projects can be discovered, audited, shared,

Reviewer: Let's keep it simple - Models, not artifacts

Author: OK removed most "artifact" mentions now.

tested, and deployed from here.  
DVC works on top of Git to enable these capabilities on your existing software
engineering stack. Other tools from [Iterative](https://iterative.ai/) provide
complementary features and more usability.

![](/img/ml_model_registry_placement.jpg) _A common placement for model
registries is between development and applications. See also [Data Registries]._

[data registries]: /doc/use-cases/data-registries

> Model registries give your team key collaborative capabilities:

Reviewer: `collaborative capabilities` - model registries are not only about collaboration ... I think previous version was better or we had some other problems/doubts?

Author: Removed "collaborative". The list hasn't changed much recently except for the last bullet about centralizing, which I added recently.

> - Store and present your model artifacts to others, from early-stage

Reviewer: just models  ... not need to introduce additional terms, they don't give any additional information?

  [experiment] results to production-ready models.
- Collect, organize, and track the [versions] of different models effectively;
  with full data provenance and lineage trails based on [reproducible modeling].
- Save performance [metrics and plots] or other metadata to evaluate or compare
  models.
- An interface to access specific model versions from other systems (e.g. in

>   CI/CD)

Reviewer: or in production ...

> - Centralize ML models from multiple projects into a global repository, if

Reviewer: ppl won't understand this ...

Author: Removed. I suppose the centralization feature is implied in other bullets and explanations. Not really the goal anyway, just a possible byproduct of this pattern

  needed.

[experiment]: /doc/user-guide/experiment-management
[versions]: /doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files
[reproducible modeling]: /doc/start/data-pipelines
[metrics and plots]: /doc/start/metrics-parameters-plots

Many of these benefits are built into DVC: Your [modeling process] and
performance information become **codified** in Git-based <abbr>DVC
projects</abbr>. This makes it possible to manage them with standard GitOps
workflows along with code. Large model files are stored separately and
efficiently, and can be pushed to [remote storage] -- a scalable access point.

DVC repos are also great for [sharing] data and models. You can get the
artifacts described by DVC into production in a few ways: by deploying with the
`dvc` [CLI], or integrating into Python code using the [API]. You can even
automate their training and delivery [via CML].

> To build the registry, the relevant artifacts from your ML projects (whether

Reviewer: Still, I don't think we need to go that much into packaging models into a single repo. To some extent GitHub with multiple repos becomes that place, We can mention this, but it should come after GTO, MLEM, Studio MR, etc

Author: > I don't think we need to go that much into packaging models into a single repo

I agree. It's no longer my intention to give this impression. In fact we already removed all explicit info about centralizing. Here "packaging" doesn't have to mean to move/import them into a central repo.

Let me rework this to avoid the confusion though ⌛

Author: I rewrote the last 2 paragraphs (mainly) to present and expand the GTO strategy first, then mention packaging and presenting models together virtually (i.e. Studio MR) or by actually centralizing them. PTAL

using DVC or not) can be **packaged** together with their metadata using

> Git-native mechanics. One option is to annotate the repo using tags with [GTO].

Reviewer: One option ... I don't see the connection between the packaging part and one option tbh

Author: > I don't see the connection between the packaging part and one option

These ideas are now in separate paragraphs. Clearer? Or do you now think the package manager analogy is too far fetched @shcheklein ?

# Machine Learning Model Registry

> A **model registry** is a construct to catalog ML models and their versions.

Reviewer: sorry, but "construct" is also very unusual ... why not tool?

Author: No strong opinion
```suggestion
A **model registry** is a tool to catalog ML models and their versions.
```

Models from your data science projects can be discovered, audited, shared,
tested, and deployed from here.  
DVC works on top of Git to enable these capabilities on your existing software
engineering stack. Other tools from [Iterative](https://iterative.ai/) provide
complementary features and more usability.

![](/img/ml_model_registry_placement.jpg) _A common placement for model
registries is between development and applications. See also [Data Registries]._

[data registries]: /doc/use-cases/data-registries

Model registries give your team key capabilities:

- Store and present your models to others, from early-stage [experiment] results
  to production-ready models.
- Collect, organize, and track the [versions] of different models effectively;
  with full data provenance and lineage trails based on [reproducible modeling].
- Save performance [metrics and plots] or other metadata to evaluate or compare
  models.
- An interface to access specific model versions from other systems (e.g. in

>   CI/CD or production environments)

Author: OK I did some rephrasing and consolidating of the existing bullets in order to include ☝🏼 

> one is missing: "Productionize" 

This is what I'm getting: "(Re)place different models on certain stages (dev, shadow, prod, etc.) without touching the application layer." WDYT?

> Security and audit trail

Added them as a single (last) item. PTAL.

[versions]: /doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files
[reproducible modeling]: /doc/start/data-pipelines
[metrics and plots]: /doc/start/metrics-parameters-plots

Many of these benefits are built into DVC: Your [modeling process] and
performance information become **codified** in Git-based <abbr>DVC
projects</abbr>. This makes it possible to manage them with standard GitOps
workflows along with code. Large model files are stored separately and
efficiently, and can be pushed to [remote storage] -- a scalable access point.

DVC repos are also great for [sharing] any data artifact. You can get the models
described by DVC into production in a few ways: by deploying with the `dvc`
[CLI], or integrating into Python code using the [API]. You can even automate
their training and delivery [via CML].

To build a Git-native registry, the ML models in your repos can be annotated
using tags. [GTO] (Git Tag Ops) is a tool to do just that! The annotations carry
meaningful metadata, such as a model file path (or [DVC metafile]), development
stage, deployment environment, etc. This helps you manage your models lifecycle:
promoting versions, rolling back, and reviewing their history.

> This approach is like **packaging** the models with their related information,

Reviewer: this is what MLEM can do

Reviewer: okay, I guess I'm still lost :) what is that we trying to say in this paragraph? could you clarify please?

I think MLEM is def ready to be mentioned / linked.

Author: Well I rewrote the bottom paragraphs now so it's quite different, plus I fully mentioned MLEM (iteration 1). PTAL @shcheklein ! Resolving this review for now.

> p.s. removed Studio mention for now since the MR release is still a bit away (I think).

> # Machine Learning Model Registry

Author: Should we call this **Git-native Model Registry** or **MRaC** (MR as code) instead? In the future

Reviewer: A bit too complicate. Business use case is "Model Registry" - everything else hides it to my mind

> A **model registry** is a central catalog for data artifacts produced in

Reviewer: data artifacts -> ML models

> multiple data science projects. Different models can be discovered, audited,

Reviewer: `multiple` - we can get rid of this

shared, tested, and deployed from here. DVC works on top of Git to enable these

> capabilities on your existing ecosystem. And other tools from

Reviewer: ecosystem -> existing software engineering stack

> [Iterative](https://iterative.ai/) provide even better features and usability.

Reviewer: better -> more?

Reviewer: they are not better ... they are additional

Author: Changed to more features and better usability

division between ML and App operations!

![](/img/ml_model_registry_placement.jpg) _A common placement for model
registries is between development and applications. See also [Data Registries]._

> 

Author: Figure improvement idea: make Git a central concept e.g.

<img width="643" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1477535/167967249-a47c99c8-fd42-48c1-84dc-695dd58fce8b.png">
> From GTO presentation

Author: p.s. applies to benefits list, which currently covers model registries in general, no Git-as-single-source-of-truth focus yet.

Model catalogs give your team key collaborative capabilities:

- Store, organize, and track the [versions] of different models effectively.
- Full data provenance and lineage trails guarantee that your modeling is
  reproducible.

> - Share and control access to any data artifact, from early-stage [experiment]

Reviewer: data -> model

Author: I thought "data provenance" was a specific concept + a key term

Reviewer: I meant ... data artifact -> model artifact 

Or maybe I'm missing your point?

  results to production-ready models.

> - Save performance [metrics and plots] to quickly evaluate and compare models.

Reviewer: Save -> Store (and show?)

Author: Hmmm... The first bullet already reads "Store ... models effectively" -> Changed that to "Collect".
Changed this bullet to "Store and present your model artifacts" (more focused on discoverability since we mention "interface to access" in the last bullet.

- An interface to access specific model versions from other systems (e.g. for
  CI/CD)

[versions]: /doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files
[experiment]: /doc/user-guide/experiment-management
[metrics and plots]: /doc/start/metrics-parameters-plots

Many of these benefits are built into DVC: Your [modeling process] and
performance metadata become **codified** in Git-based <abbr>DVC projects</abbr>.
This makes it possible to manage them with standard GitOps workflows along with
code. Large model files are stored separately and can be pushed to [remote
storage], an efficient and scalable access point.

The relevant outputs of these model development projects can then be
**packaged** together with their metadata, and published in a [global Git

> repository]. With DVC, existing model files stored remotely are reused, so

Author: We first mention "global Git repo" and link to the GTO section.

Reviewer: GTO is not about global repos at all. I think we still make too much emphasis on the global repo setup. This is an advanced use case that would replace in CLU an upcoming Studio MR. I would not make the whole paragraph about this.

Author: Yes, the current text focuses on a "global" centralized registry that collects models from many projects, similar to the base case presented in https://dvc.org/doc/use-cases/data-registries but for models. I realize GTO is designed with source repos in mind though, so indeed this link text doesn't make sense.

But more broadly, I guess I should focus more on the cataloging aspect and less on the centralizing aspect in general.. ⌛

Author: * now that we're incorporating GTO

building the registry is fast. A connection to the original projects is
preserved, so you can always get the full lineage and provenance information.

> DVC repos are already great for [sharing] data and models. They can also help

Reviewer: It's not like repos help get us models - it's DVC provides APIs / tools to get models described in repos ... that are natively compatible with CI systems (since DVC works on top git) - it's "Git native" to some extent :)

Author: Maybe this part is somewhat unclear? I'm still thinking mainly on a pure DVC model registry at this point (imported artifacts from other repos). You could `dvc get` models directly from this kind of registry or integrate them with `dvc.api.open`...

you get models from the registry to production: deploying manually with the
`dvc` [CLI] or integrating in code using DVC's Python [API]. You can even
automate their training and delivery [via CML]. In fact any downstream system

> can sync with you models lifecycle using _GTO_.

Author: We then properly introduce GTO (associated with the "model lifecycle" concpt) in the deployment/ integration explanations.

[modeling process]: doc/start/data-pipelines
[remote storage]: /doc/command-reference/remote
[global git repository]: #model-registries-based-on-annotated-git-tags
[sharing]: /doc/start/data-and-model-access
[cli]: /doc/command-reference
[api]: /doc/api-reference
[via cml]: https://cml.dev/doc/cml-with-dvc

## Model Registries based on annotated Git tags

[GTO] (Git Tag Ops) is a free, open-source tool that let's you turn any Git
repository into an artifact registry. Tag artifact versions and annotate them
with meaningful metadata. Manage model states throughout their lifecycle:
promoting for production, rolling back, and reviewing their history. And any
Git-based system can [sync with these events].

GTO integrates nicely into DVC repos by using [metafiles] as annotations for

> your artifacts.

Author: Finally this is the GTO section for now.

Reviewer: text is good, but I still think we don't need the whole section, it feels artificial and too complicated

  production-ready, including their [metrics, plots], or other metadata to help
  use and evaluate them.
- Organize and track model [versions] effectively; with full data provenance and
  lineage information based on [reproducible modeling].
- A single interface to access specific models, both for collaboration (from
  other teammate machines) and to productionize them (e.g. via CI/CD).
- Designate certain models for different environments stages (dev, shadow, prod,
  etc.) without having to touch the applications that use them.
- For security, control who can manage models, and audit their usage trails.

[experiments]: /doc/user-guide/experiment-management
[metrics, plots]: /doc/start/metrics-parameters-plots
[versions]: /doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files
[reproducible modeling]: /doc/start/data-pipelines

Many of these benefits are built into DVC: Your [modeling process] and
performance information become **codified** in Git-based <abbr>DVC
projects</abbr>. This makes it possible to manage them with standard Git
workflows along with code. Large model files are stored separately and
efficiently, and can be pushed to [remote storage] -- a scalable access point.

> DVC repos are also great for [sharing] any data artifact. You can get the models

Reviewer: it feels we don't need this paragraph, I don't feel it's value to be honest ... what is the main idea here?

Author: Selling DVC. Specific features it provides to the MR.

described by DVC into production in a few ways: [import] them into a central
repo, deploy using the `dvc` [CLI], or integrate into Python code with the
[API]. You can even automate their training and delivery [via CML].

An additional route to build a Git-native registry is to **annotate** ML models
in your repos using tags. [GTO] (Git Tag Ops) is a tool to do just that! The
annotations carry meaningful metadata, such as a model file path, deployment
env, etc. and get codified in the repo. GTO also helps manage your models
lifecycle: promoting versions, rolling back, and reviewing history.

To finish closing the gap between model training and software development, you
can fully **package** models by introducing [MLEM] in any Python ML code that

> uses common libraries like `sklearn` or `xgboost`. MLEM automagically codifies

Reviewer: let's not mention libraries, otherwise we would have to mention all of them

Reviewer: I would simplify this paragraph and try to merge with GTO

Author: I kind of like having a paragraph for each tool.

all the context needed to produce data and models in the Git repo. It's also
able to push them to any cloud storage (by itself or via DVC), as well as to
list and transfer models between locations, or even serve them directly!

> Each of these complementary methods brings your ML process to GitOps practices,

Reviewer: "methods" - feel like it's not the right term

overall "While each tool can be used independently ... .This ecosystem of tools ..."

Author: Changed.

> especially to manage and deploy models with mature software delivery methods.

Reviewer: "mature" - drop it

Author: Done.

> This means for example Github Actions or Gitlab CI/CD, which can now

Reviewer: example in this very general paragraph seems artificial (or requires other examples)

Author: Changed examples for "continuous integration".

> automatically sync with the state of the artifacts in your model registry.

Author: WDYT about this text @iterative/mlem ?

Author: p.s. my self-review is that the body of the page has become a little long even when these paragraphs are extremely summarized. Maybe we should consider putting them a 2nd section so the structure is clearer (0. general MR benefits, 1. DVC layer, 2. other alternative/complementary layers i.e. GTO and MLEM for now). Or to use more diagrams, other bullet/numbered lists, etc. to make the text less "boring" so-to-speak. That said all that could be left for a near future iteration once Studio MR is released.

Reviewer: yes. agreed, it's too long now
